---
date: 2017-06-10
layout: post
title: An introduction to Wayland
tags: [wayland, instructional]
---

Wayland is the new hotness on the Linux graphics stack. There are plenty of
introductions to Wayland that give you the high level details on how the stack
is laid out how applications talk directly to the kernel with EGL and so on, but
that doesn't give you much practical knowledge. I'd like to instead share with
you details about how the protocol actually works and how you can use it.

This article has been translated: [ру́сский](http://howtorecover.me/vvedenie-v-wayland)

Let's set aside the idea that Wayland has anything to do with graphics. Instead
we'll treat it like a generic protocol for two parties to share and talk about
resources. These resources are at the heart of the Wayland protocol - resources
like a keyboard or a surface to draw on. Each of these resources exposes an API
for engaging with it, including functions you can call and *events* you can
listen to.

Some of these resources are *globals*, which are exactly what they sound like.
These resources include things like **wl_outputs**, which are the displays
connected to your graphics card. Other resources, like **wl_surface**, require
the client to ask the server to allocate new resources when needed. Negotiating
for new resources is generally possible through the API of some global resource.

Your Wayland client gets started by obtaining a reference to the **wl_display**
like so:

```c
struct wl_display *display = wl_display_connect(NULL);
```

This establishes a connection to the Wayland server. The most important role of
the display, from the client perspective, is to provide the **wl_registry**.
The registry enumerates the globals available on the server.

```c
struct wl_registry *registry = wl_display_get_registry(display);
```

The registry emits an *event* every time the server adds or removes a global.
*Listening* to these events is done by providing an implementation of a
**wl_registry_listener**, like so:

```c
void global_add(void *our_data,
        struct wl_registry *registry,
        uint32_t name,
        const char *interface,
        uint32_t version) {
    // TODO
}

void global_remove(void *our_data,
        struct wl_registry *registry,
        uint32_t name) {
    // TODO
}

struct wl_registry_listener registry_listener = {
    .global = global_add,
    .global_remove = global_remove
};
```

Interfaces like this are used to listen to events from all kinds of resources.
Attaching the listener to the registry is done like this:

```c
void *our_data = /* arbitrary state you want to keep around */;
wl_registry_add_listener(registry, &registry_listener, our_data);
wl_display_dispatch(display);
```

During the `wl_display_dispatch`, the `global_add` function is called for each
global on the server. Subsequent calls to `wl_display_dispatch` may call
`global_remove` when the server destroys globals. The `name` passed into
`global_add` is more like an ID, and identifies this resource. The `interface`
tells you what API the resource implements, and distinguishes things like a
**wl_output** from a **wl_seat**. The API these resources implement are
described with XML files like this:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- For copyright information, see https://git.io/vHyIB -->
<protocol name="gamma_control">
    <interface name="gamma_control_manager" version="1">
        <request name="destroy" type="destructor"/>

        <request name="get_gamma_control">
            <arg name="id" type="new_id" interface="gamma_control"/>
            <arg name="output" type="object" interface="wl_output"/>
        </request>
    </interface>

    <interface name="gamma_control" version="1">
        <enum name="error">
            <entry name="invalid_gamma" value="0"/>
        </enum>

        <request name="destroy" type="destructor"/>

        <request name="set_gamma">
            <arg name="red" type="array"/>
            <arg name="green" type="array"/>
            <arg name="blue" type="array"/>
        </request>

        <request name="reset_gamma"/>

        <event name="gamma_size">
            <arg name="size" type="uint"/>
        </event>
    </interface>
</protocol>
```

A typical Wayland server implementing this protocol would create a
`gamma_control_manager` global and add it to the registry. The client then binds
to this interface in our `global_add` function like so:

```c
#include "wayland-gamma-control-client-protocol.h"
// ...
struct wl_output *example;
// gamma_control_manager.name is a constant: "gamma_control_manager"
if (strcmp(interface, gamma_control_manager.name) == 0) {
    struct gamma_control_manager *mgr =
        wl_registry_bind(registry, name,
            &gamma_control_manager_interface, version);
    struct gamma_control *control =
        gamma_control_manager_get_gamma_control(mgr, example);
    gamma_control_set_gamma(control, ...);
}
```

These functions are generated by running the XML file through `wayland-scanner`,
which outputs a header and C glue code. These XML files are called "protocol
extensions" and let you add arbitrary extensions to the protocol. The core
Wayland protocols themselves are described with similar XML files.

Using the Wayland protocol to create a surface to display pixels with consists
of these steps:

1. Obtain a **wl_display** and use it to obtain a **wl_registry**.
2. Scan the registry for globals and grab a **wl_compositor** and
   a **wl_shm_pool**.
3. Use the **wl_compositor** interface to create a **wl_surface**.
4. Use the **wl_shell** interface to describe your surface's role.
5. Use the **wl_shm** interface to allocate shared memory to store pixels in.
6. Draw something into your shared memory buffers.
7. Attach your shared memory buffers to the **wl_surface**.

Let's break this down.

The **wl_compositor** provides an interface for interacting with the
*compositor*, that is the part of the Wayland server that *composites* surfaces
onto the screen. It's responsible for creating surface resources for clients to
use via `wl_compositor_create_surface`. This creates a **wl_surface** resource,
which you can attach pixels to for the compositor to render.

The role of a surface is undefined by default - it's just a place to put pixels.
In order to get the compositor to do anything with them, you must give the
surface a *role*. Roles could be anything - desktop background, system tray, etc -
but the most common role is a *shell surface*. To create these, you take your
wl_surface and hand it to the **wl_shell** interface. You'll get back a
**wl_shell_surface** resource, which defines your surface's purpose and gives
you an interface to do things like set the window title.

Attaching pixel buffers to a wl_surface is pretty straightforward. There are two
primary ways of creating a buffer that both you and the compositor can use: EGL
and shared memory. EGL lets you use an OpenGL context that renders directly on
the GPU with minimal compositor involvement (fast) and shared memory (via
**wl_shm**) allows you to simply dump pixels in memory and hand them to the
compositor (flexible). There are many other Wayland interfaces I haven't
covered, giving you everything from input devices (via **wl_seat**) to clipboard
access (via **wl_data_source**), plus many protocol extensions. Learning more
about these is an exercise left to the reader.

Before we wrap this article up, let's take a brief moment to discuss the server.
Most of the concepts here are already familiar to you by now. The Wayland server
also utilizes a **wl_display**, but differently from the client. The display on
the server has ownership over the *event loop*, via **wl_event_loop**. The event
loop of a Wayland server might look like this:

```c
struct wl_display *display = wl_display_create();
// ...
struct wl_event_loop *event_loop = wl_display_get_event_loop(display);
while (true) {
    wl_event_loop_dispatch(event_loop, 0);
}
```

The event loop has a lot of helpful utilities for the Wayland server to take
advantage of, including internal event sources, timers, and file descriptor
monitoring. Before starting the event loop the server is going to start
obtaining its own resources and creating Wayland globals for them with
`wl_global_create`:

```c
struct wl_global *global = wl_global_create(
    display,
    &wl_output_interface,
    1 /* version */,
    our_data,
    wl_output_bind);
```

The `wl_output_bind` function here is going to be called when a client attempts
to bind to this resource via `wl_registry_bind`, and will look something like
this:

```c
void wl_output_bind(struct wl_client *client,
        void *our_data,
        uint32_t their_version,
        uint32_t id) {
    struct wl_resource *resource =
        wl_resource_create_checked(
            client,
            wl_output_interface,
            their_version,
            our_version,
            id);
    // ...send output modes or whatever else you need to do
}
```

Some of the resources a server is going to be managing might include:

- DRM state for direct access to outputs
- GLES context (or another GL implementation) for rendering
- libinput for input devices
- udev for hotplugging

Through the Wayland protocol, the server provides an abstraction on top of these
resources and offers them to clients. Some servers go further, with novel ways
of compositing clients or handling input. Some provide additional interactivity,
such as desktop shells that are actually running in the compositor rather than
external clients. Other servers are designed for mobile use and provide a user
experience that more closely matches the mobile experience than the traditional
desktop experience. Wayland is designed to be flexible!
